i hope you guys enjoyed the episode
brought to you by our sponsor blinkist
go to blinkist.com impact theory to get
off a blinkist premium membership and a
seven day free trial all right enjoy the
episode hey everybody
welcome to impact theory our goal with
the show and company is to introduce you
to the people and ideas that will help
you actually
execute on your dreams in celebration of
the
quickly approaching new year the end of
2020 which i know everybody has been
waiting for and here it is my friends
we have put together a very special
episode of impact theory
we all know what a challenging year 2020
has been but even
through the difficult times it's
possible to learn and grow
and these are some of the amazing guests
who have helped us through this year
so get ready to have your mind blown my
friends with our first guest
the one and only brendan burchard
i want to talk to you about consciously
designing your life it's an
idea that i see you live day in and day
out thank you
everything in your world seems
completely integrated the people that
you hang out with
the things that you do to have the
energy the things you focus on to make
sure that you remain excited like it all
feels like there's nothing that's sort
of by accident in your life
so what's the whole concept and how do
you actually pull it off you know i
think i talked about this last time
a little bit about my car accident so
when i was a 19 year old kid
i had this car accident and prior to the
car accident i had been suicidal
and you know coming out of breakup with
the woman i loved
i lost my identity in that became
suicidal had the car accident
and it was just powerful ejection
position because
here i am suicidal want to take my life
and then i get an accident that says
oh no i don't want to die and it forced
me
to consider how i will evaluate my life
at the end of my life
and that has always been the driving
force for me is i realize at the end of
my life
for me personally i'm going to ask these
questions to evaluate was i happy with
my life and those for me are did i live
did i love did i matter which isn't for
some people
watching like so what but i was 19
and it set in me and so if you think
about it
you know that was what 23 years ago
if you wake up every day with a super
clear intention
and reverence for life realizing how
short it is you
absolutely get your act together but how
do you like how do you really turn that
into a road map
and start doing the right things because
one i think a lot of people could waste
a moment like that the eye-opening thing
a lot of people could do it for a while
and then
without without concrete things to do on
a daily basis
like what i really want people to
understand in
um all the research that you've done in
high performance and all that it comes
down to things that you can do it comes
down to things that you can teach it
comes down to things that
people can um structure their life
around and what i want
to dive into today is that structure
yeah you know what's funny is like
i think you nailed it people take an
eye-opening experience and some
don't do anything with it and some
people grow from it and
i came back from that experience i was
in college and
prior to going back i was a depressed
kid the sad kid
the kind of lonely kid kind of pull away
from the world kid because i was hurt
i came back and i had this new intention
to live
so i wanted to meet people and talk to
people they're like who are you and
anytime you change your life usually
people are like what's wrong with you
someone's like what's wrong with you but
i was like i'm gonna change because
i knew i didn't want misery anymore i
didn't want suffering i didn't want
sadness i didn't want negative thinking
i didn't want poor quality of
relationships i didn't want to
feel horrible so i began the quest of
well how do
i not feel horrible so i started reading
first i started
personal development self-help then
jumped into spirituality then jumped
into psychology
then jumped into neuroscience then
jumped into sociology then jumped into
leadership and spent
every week for 23 years i've read a book
a week
on one of those topics for 23 years
there's really two concepts that i think
set you apart you've got
just how powerful negative thinking is
and some of the stats around that which
are pretty terrifying and some of the
stories that you have
on that which are i think will really
shake people out
yeah um and then of course there's
neutral thinking so i think that's sort
of uh
the next one two that we should walk
through yeah and and
and then i think probably the third part
of that would be sort of the impact of
behavior
you know of identifying behavior but
what i learned ultimately
my dad was the president of the national
association for self-esteem
most people probably don't even know
there is that and he was one of the
first authors of chicken soup for the
soul so for anybody that's
probably above 35 that they would know
that but the power of positive thinking
never resonated with me
and when i was young and i was 18 years
old and drop out of college and i was
diagnosed with an initial diagnosis
of cancer and it turned out to be
shingles and a number of other things
i did start to understand quickly that
well i don't know if positive thinking
works all the time
and that the data's anecdotal i do know
that negative thinking does work
and it works negatively and one of the
things as i would start at
alabama and i would start with the
jacksonville jaguars and i'd start with
the miami dolphins
i started to realize and even looking
back to a young age
that nobody wants to be told to be
positive
the positive thinking is probably the
number one reason this industry
has not grown in my 44 years of living
positive thinking in many cases repulses
people
you're telling me to be positive and i'm
going through a divorce you're telling
me to be positive and i threw three
interceptions
you're telling me to be positive and i
gotta deal with this president you're
telling me to be positive and i got this
current situation
you're telling me to be positive and i
got this health situation so then what's
the alternative
well the alternative has always been
negative so
when we would get to the university of
alabama you have a
this finite window of time how long
could you influence
everything comes down to influence would
you agree whether it's your family your
kids whatever the circumstance
or the situations so the ncaa gives you
22 hours
to influence your players over a week
and
so when you look at the human
performance you look at nutrition you
look at strength and conditioning you
look at fatigue signs you look at all
these different things
coach saban believed that there had to
be some emphasis on psychological
education
and so how are we going to do that and
how is it going to be efficient
well most people think of sports
psychology as treating somebody who has
a problem
nick saban didn't look at it that way he
looked at how do we make our best
players better
how do we take great players and make
them greater and then how do we have an
educational platform
for all 120 players and a college
football team is a business it's 120
employees
and you lose 35 of those employees every
year
and it's an ebitda driven business where
when you succeed
you get more sponsorship and as you get
more sponsorship you make more money
and as you make more money the school
makes more money and everybody benefits
and it all happens from winning but if
your best players
leave every year in that 35 and they
take their great behaviors and their
great habits and their great mindset
with them
then you're in trouble so you have to
develop programmatics
you have to develop a system i mean you
look at quests and what you guys did
that ultimately when you were going to
sell it you're going to evolve
that there had to be if we're going to
create the ultimate metabolic
type of food or we're going to limit
like the recipe has to be the same so
you're not the only one that can cook it
so ultimately psychologically we had to
come up with a plan for everybody
i think that learning how to meditate
and regulate your breath is important
but to me i think that's ap chemistry
and we need an eighth grade version
where we just know okay that there's a a
a table of elements
and we need the basics and and so that's
what we did when we started to study
what we learned was that negative
thinking was the most
powerful element that our players were
combating
that negative thinking was weaponized
weaponizing them against them
so how's negativity carried well is it
your internal thoughts
well if you're dealing with trying to
change internal thoughts then you've got
to go to affirmations and you've got to
go to imagery you've got to go to
visualization
very difficult skills well we started to
look at
the externalization well if somebody
says something out loud
it's ten times more powerful than if
they think it
and then as we started to study the data
particularly data that was just
reinforced by christine porath from
georgetown
and harvard that negativity is a
multiple
of four to seven times more powerful
than positivity
so think about that if i say something
out loud it's 10x
if it's negative it's four to seven
times more powerful
so when i say negative things out loud
it's 40 to 70 times
more likely that that will happen or
cause a result that won't be good for me
than if i just didn't say anything my
whole like thesis in life is to get
people to understand
your brain is creating a virtual world
for you you have mistaken this virtual
world for the real world yes
and once you understand we're talking
about oomvel's here homie we're talking
about you take the world in a certain
way which is why the article
by nagel on what it's like to be a bat
is
so fascinating it's asking you to step
outside your own umvelt
into something else's and say how
fundamentally different would this whole
experience be
but what i really want people to
understand this this was a huge
breakthrough for me when i went from
having a totally fixed mindset
and i just thought life is hopeless and
i can't go where i want to go because
i'm only so intelligent and i'm just not
that bright
and so i'm stuck here and i spent a lot
of time there
and then began to realize wait a second
i started reading about the brain
i was like whoa like the brain is
cobbling [__] together
yeah it's keeping me from bumping into
too much stuff right and for that i am
grateful
but ultimately like there's a lot of
lies being told to me
by this evolutionary machine and once i
could begin to
think through them and go oh whoa like
it's it's interpreting this it's
interpreting that
what is it interpreting that's creating
an emotion for me that isn't helpful
i think people also experience a lot of
relief
from this idea that they are responsible
for all of that processing too and so
this gets into um
when i when i talk about these examples
in my book i'm specifically talking
about
two illusions that i think
inform our view of consciousness which
is why i spend a lot of time on them
and one is this illusion of conscious
will
and one is the illusion of being a self
and i think that that's one place that
that relates to a lot of the work that
you do
um because this false sense of a self
is actually where a lot of human
suffering comes from and part of it is
is what i was just getting at which is
that
we have this idea that you know even
though we understand that we're
brain processing you know at bottom
somehow we have a very strong intuition
that
there's a me that is separate from the
brain processing
and um there can be a lot of
um guilt and regret and and things like
this that come about because of kind of
a false way of viewing
um what in fact we are and what our
conscious experience is
so the the notion of this this self that
somehow can
override whatever the brain is doing or
um
you know make make decisions somehow i
mean it's funny it's an incoherent idea
but we all have it very strongly and we
kind of assume it's there
um it's related to the notion of
conscious will and i like to distinguish
a free will well i was just going to say
i like to distinguish conscious will
from free will
only because free will um by my
definition
is a much more complex thing and i i we
could actually talk for a long time and
i could
explain why i think there's not much
freedom in free will
but that free will is is something that
in some sense i can agree that
the brain has it's it's a complex
processing system it's responding to all
kinds of stimuli
and ideas and can can change and mutate
and
and and make decisions as a processing
device for a lack of a better word
conscious will is the idea that
consciousness is the thing
that is that is the will that
consciousness is the will
so we have again it's related to these
questions that i that i ask in the
beginning of my book
is consciousness doing something and we
feel that
consciousness is behind our willed
actions
when in fact there's a lot of
neuroscience to suggest that it's it's
actually the reverse that it's that it's
at the end that all this processing
happens
a decision gets made and then we're kind
of the last to know um i have a chapter
in my book called along for the ride
um which can also be distressing to to
people when they forget where people get
free time
i get it too actually but and ultimately
i actually think it's very freeing and
it doesn't mean
you can't so so the brain is not in any
way a closed system
just because our conscious experience is
of what the brain is doing
doesn't mean at all that the brain is
not influenced by
ideas um and you know
and even in physical terms as you said
you can you can have a brain tumor that
will
dramatically alter what your conscious
experience is
but more importantly for for this type
of discussion you know if i
yelled and said oh that that beam is
about to fall on you
that's an idea that just gets
communicated through language that
suddenly
changes your brain so your brain is as a
physical system but
my words my ideas get in and it
completely changes the structure of your
brain so much that
you're going to jump up like i could get
you to jump up just by
transferring that information the thing
that i think is is a true illusion
is that consciousness comes first and
consciousness is again wrapped up in
this idea of a
self so that there's this self that's
kind of floating free from the material
world somehow
and is initiating everything that
happens and i think that is a is a false
view
[Music]
and so where i would love to hear your
thoughts is
how much of the parameters of the
project do you give someone like if you
say
i know this can be done in a week i know
it can be done on this budget
and you say that hey get this done like
it can't be done
then of course to convince them what i
do is i give them the path
and i say well if you did this it would
work do we agree and then when they
agree
they can go do it but by then i've now
taken all of that ownership away from
them and they're just executing on
exactly my plan and so i know i'm not
getting what you're talking about
so it's like [__] do i really just back
off and go
i know it's not impossible but it's
impossible if i don't want to ruin this
relationship
how do you handle situations like that i
ask
questions now when i ask questions this
is a this is a tool
but it's also legitimate questions
so when i say hey tom here's the project
i want you to get done
can you take a look at it and tell me
how you want to get it done and you come
back to me
you know three days later and you say
hey boss i was looking at this thing and
it's just not possible and i don't say
well actually it is possible so i've
already thought it through here's how
here's how you need to do it
instead i go well what's what what do
you think our real challenges are
and then you say well you know we can't
get the supplies in time and then you
say well and also we don't have enough
manning
and i say okay well how what's taken the
supplies so long to get here
and you say well you know they're coming
across the country on a truck
and so it's going to take you know a
week and a half for them to get here
and we don't have enough people because
it's going to take 190 man hours in this
amount of time
and and i only have three guys so it's
impossible
and i go is there any other way to ship
stuff across the country
and you say well i mean
i guess we could we could fly but it's
going to be more expensive oh
okay well how much more expensive you
see what i'm saying right and so
eventually
eventually you're going to come to the
solution you're going to come to the
solution
and and i'm going to be happy that you
come to solution or there's a chance
that you actually say
hey jonco it's it's not possible and
here's why and you tell me something
that i didn't
i didn't foresee because i'm at a higher
level i'm elevated i'm working on
i'm overseeing 14 different projects you
just got one when you dig in and you
pull the thread you realize it can't be
done i go oh
okay well i that makes sense
okay yeah i uh i love
that and you have two elements that
i'll say maybe are a dichotomy but i'll
be interested to hear what you think
which is
your you always soft shoe it a little
bit that talk about it
is kind of manipulation uh and then
truth
and you have chapters on both in the
book where do you come down
on how just sort of transparent you are
versus knowing i have an outcome that i
need to get to i'm realistic about human
psychology if i just come in and [__]
give you the answer
it doesn't work you feel robbed of your
agency and your ownership and so i have
to get you there slowly
but i'm also trying not to make it
obvious that i'm leading you there
i'm legitimately asking these questions
i'm not i'm not doing this
okay well we're gonna get you there and
that's what's gonna happen i already
know the outcome
no i i think i know the outcome but i'm
not sure of it
you know how many times i'm sure of what
the outcome's gonna be not very often
so that the truth is i am i'm being
totally
transparent i'm asking legitimate
questions i think i know the answers
i think they're going to lead to the
right place and so it's okay to let that
run its course now you talked about
manipulation manipulation obviously has
a bad connotation
leadership has a good connotation what's
the difference between the two
because guess what if i'm manipulating
you i'm trying to get you to do
something
if i'm leading you i'm trying to get you
to do something and many of the tools
are very similar so what's the
difference between me leading you and me
manipulating you
it's very easy for me to answer that
question if i'm manipulating you
i'm trying to get you to do something
that's going to benefit me if i'm
leading
i'm trying to get you to do something
that's going to benefit you
it's going to benefit the team and it's
going to benefit the mission
[Music]
the whole notion of dharma to me hit
home really hard in that story in the
book and you talk about one of the
people in particular who was changing
like the photographs out for people so
that they had something new to see and
somebody asked her like
is that part of your job and what was
her response i thought this
this summed up dharma for me in a really
visceral way
yeah it was it's not part of my job it's
how i see my job right it's how i
perceive what i do
and the term is job crafting where you
have assigned
meaning to the task you've assigned
meaning
to the experience that you're now
fueling that work
rather than letting the job description
be your only definition of it
yeah when she was stepping into that and
saying like okay i
knowing who i am and knowing how i feel
and
what it means to me to take care of this
person to look at a small detail like
that and to imbue
this thing which somebody else might
think of as you know sort of a gross job
or whatever
but to bring the beauty that i want to
bring to it
it it's me recognizing she didn't use
the words dharma but it's me recognizing
my purpose it's me
like not asking what's the definition of
the job but instead how do i bring
my truest purpose the unique way that i
would do this job
and bring that to this situation now
this is where your book got
really interesting for me is this
interesting interplay between
there's a uh a sense of
your essence who you are and then there
is
bringing that into the things that you
do
and so you could take something you talk
about like cleaning
the um the monastery like in the tiny
tiny little ways but how
what you would do is you would think
about cleaning this i imagine myself
cleaning my my own heart and so now it
becomes not
actually polishing a monastery it
becomes like the spiritual pursuit of
recognizing one that even as you get to
the end of cleaning it's dirty again and
so
it's this continual thing but that was
that that being able to begin to tease
those things out that some things will
seem
really boring and dull but you can imbue
them with meaning and then there's this
thing inside of you that when you align
to the things that you like and that you
enjoy is like the the sort of raw
response is there but you can also
create a response yeah and how do you
help people like bring those together
you talked a little bit about it with
job crafting
but how do you get people out of a woe
is me mentality
into you know finding ways to to make
their life
beautiful i really believe that you have
to seek
the love and the beauty that you want in
what you have now
because that way you're training
yourself to extract
meaning right now which means in the
short term
if you can like those hospital workers
we're doing
if you can fill that role with meaning
and your true passion
and what's coming from you then that's
going to lead you to discovering the
power of it and i saw that in my own
life when i
came back from being a monk and i worked
in the corporate world
i was teaching meditation and
mindfulness and the things that i talk
today
in the corporate world and i remember in
i was invited by one of our executives
to teach mindfulness to a thousand of my
peers
at twickenham rugby stadium and i was
speaking in between the ceo
and will greenwood who won the rugby
world cup with england
and and i'm sitting there in the
audience as a complete nobody
and completely around people of my same
age we all make the same
money no one knows who i am and there
i'm sitting there going
how am i going to share mindfulness but
after doing that experience
i realized that even though my job was
digital strategy
and social media innovation and i was a
consultant
i was bringing my passion to the
workplace
which actually gave me confidence that i
could do this
outside of the workplace and that's how
the two ideas connect
that when you find how you can apply it
to your small world
you then get the confidence and the
courage to take it out and make
something real
of it whereas i think a lot of us are
waiting for that break
to get into doing it in reality but we
actually haven't even tested it or
experimented on it
in a small space where we can develop
our
our own confidence and courage around it
[Music]
so you've talked about the little voice
that people have the need to create
quiet space to hear that
combine that with the notion of the
culture sort of chipping away at people
and whether it's
based on you know race and oppression or
whether it's just
the school system teaching you to be a
good cog in the machine or whatever
other things people have to fight
against how can people that are
listening to this now especially if
they're an adult that's
got all those labels put on them that's
had their creativity
squished what process
do they do to hear the voice what sort
of communion can they do to create that
imagination that's going to allow them
to
get out of that and move towards
something new that's the reason why you
design this program you and your team
for them to do that that they have to
expose themselves to
something that will give them a
different vision of themselves
and in addition to that they have to put
themselves
in a community of what i call oqp
only quality people a gentleman who
dramatically
transformed my life i was a junior
at booger t washington high school in
miami florida
and i went in his class looking for
another friend
and and he said go to board and work
this problem out for me
i said sir i can't do that he said why
not i said
i'm not one of your students he said do
it anyhow.
and and the other kid started laughing
saying he's
leslie he's dt and he said what's dt
he's
his brother is smart but he's the dumb
twin
and and i said i am sir and he came from
behind his desk and he
pointed at me said don't you ever say
that again someone's opinion of you does
not have to become your reality
and he taught me three things he said if
you want to become successful in life
young man
he said number one you got to change
your mindset
he said you don't get in life what you
want you get in life what you are
number two practice oqp
only quality people you earned within
two to three thousand dollars of your
closest friends
i found that out i left all my broke
friends i said you all got to go
because i used to be so broke i passed
the bank and tripped the alarm
you know and the third thing he said
develop your communication skills
because once you open your mouth
you tell the world who you are he said
those are three
major things that you want to work on
that will liberate you from living in
liberty city
living in poverty and over town it will
help to
escape out of where you are right now
because i see you watching me and i know
you want more i can see
the hunger in your eyes that's why my
book is about to come out called
you got to be hungry i love that notion
i love that title
so how do people get hungry you get
hungry by finding something that's
you i believe that all of us are born
unique
but most of us dye coffees
you've got to find out what is it that
turns you on what
resonates with you one of the things
that
i realized and what allowed me to become
successful as a speaker
the speaking industry has been hijacked
by people who
speak to sell and it's it's okay to do
that and make money
i speak to change lives because somebody
spoke
and changed my life so this is my
passion
this is my drive this is something that
i feel in my heart
and and so the key to
that hunger driven life is a
heart-centered life
i didn't do what i'm doing for years
because of my programming because
of the culture in which i was raised in
i would see other people with
with degrees and phds and and
mbas and credentials i don't have and i
convinced myself
i couldn't do it but mr washington
on that day we became friends and
and he taught me not only someone's
opinion of you this
does not have to determine your reality
he said that you have to work on
yourself and you have to have an
unstoppable attitude and no excuse
is acceptable and you've got to to
make it a a priority a non-negotiable in
your life
and hold a constant vision of what it is
you want to achieve
see it accomplished and go all out
find a way to win
all right guys i hope that you got as
much value out of that episode as i did
sitting across from those people and
getting their nuggets of wisdom
is something i'm so grateful for and
that i'm always trying to put to use in
my life
remember it does not matter what you
look at it matters what you see
so 2020 was whatever 2020 was
now 2020 is for you to make of it what
you will the control is in your hands
it is time to do something awesome with
this year take the things you learned in
this episode and put it
to use and i'll be right there with you
guys all right until next time my
friends
be legendary take care hey everyone
there's no way to build an empowering
mindset
or get ahead in business without
constantly learning and accessing new
information
and today i want to share with you guys
my secret weapon in the battle to learn
new things and get ahead
blinkist is for anyone who cares about
learning but doesn't have a lot of time
blinkus takes the key ideas and insights
from over 4
000 non-fiction bestsellers in more than
27 categories
and gathers them together in 15-minute
text and audio
explainers that help you understand more
about the core ideas
use the blinks to get into a topic
quickly find new topics to grow from
or figure out which books you want to
spend more time reading and listening to
more deeply
also they've teamed up with popular
podcast creators to blink
those for you too so you can get to the
heart of a podcast episode
fast you can use blinkist's shortcast to
quickly catch up on podcast episodes
you've missed
with high quality audio you can jump
right in on the go
during your commute at the gym around
the house or even download to listen
offline 15 million people are already
using blinkist to broaden their
knowledge in 27 non-fiction categories
including self-improvement personal
growth management
leadership and mindfulness and happiness
two books from their library that i've
listened to and
highly recommend are start with why by
simon sinek
and the power of habit by charles duhigg
right now blinkist has a special offer
just for our audience
go to blinkist.com impact theory to
start your free
7-day trial and get 25
off a blinkist premium membership that's
spelled
b-l-i-n-k-i-s-t
blinkist dot-com slash impact theory to
get 25
off a blinkist premium membership and a
seven day free trial
alright guys take care and be legendary
you